packs/stable/clojure-pack/lib/cider/doc/modules/ROOT/pages/contributing.adoc, before:

= Contributing

== Issues

Report issues and suggest features and improvements on the
https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider/issues[GitHub issue tracker]. Don't ask
questions on the issue tracker - use the xref:support.adoc[support channels] instead.

If you want to file a bug, please provide all the necessary info listed in
our issue reporting template (it's loaded automatically when you create a
new GitHub issue).

It's usually a good idea to try to reproduce (obscure) bugs in isolation. You
can do this by cloning CIDER's GitHub repo and running `make run-cider` inside
it.  This will bring up Emacs with only the latest version of CIDER loaded. By
starting fresh, with the latest code, we can ensure that the problem at hand
isn't already fixed or caused by interactions with other packages.

== Patches

Patches in any form are always welcome! GitHub pull requests are even better! :-)

Before submitting a patch or a pull request make sure all tests are
passing and that your patch is in line with the https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider/blob/master/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md[contribution
guidelines].

Commit message:

Changes to get through startup issues on emacs 29.1
Mainly updates packages where common lisp issues came up
Disabled foobit as a basic package update didn't fix the bootup issues

packs/stable/clojure-pack/lib/cider/doc/modules/ROOT/pages/contributing.adoc, after:

= Contributing

== Issues

Report issues and suggest features and improvements on the
https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider/issues[GitHub issue tracker]. Don't ask
questions on the issue tracker - use the xref:about/support.adoc[support channels] instead.

If you want to file a bug, please provide all the necessary info listed in
our issue reporting template (it's loaded automatically when you create a
new GitHub issue).

It's usually a good idea to try to reproduce (obscure) bugs in isolation. You
can do this by cloning CIDER's GitHub repo and running `make run-cider` inside
it.  This will bring up Emacs with only the latest version of CIDER loaded. By
starting fresh, with the latest code, we can ensure that the problem at hand
isn't already fixed or caused by interactions with other packages.

== Patches

Patches in any form are always welcome! GitHub pull requests are even better! :-)

If your changes do not require a REPL, consider submitting to https://github.com/clojure-emacs/clojure-mode[clojure-mode] instead.

Before submitting a patch or a pull request make sure all tests are
passing and that your patch is in line with the https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider/blob/master/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md[contribution
guidelines].
